In my internet survey of Inner Light and Sound organizations, I was
lucky to run across [Christopher Tims](http://christophertims.com/)
because only [one
website](http://www.novelguide.com/a/discover/ear_01/ear_01_00174.html)
mentions him. 

He has an understanding of Inner Light and Sound from the Dzogchen
teachings and spent some time with Eckankar. 

He is truly aware of the Sant Mat planes of consciousness and has had
some trouble teaching at times because people are addicted to their
psychic fireworks. That being said, his Inner Light and Sound teaching
has these distinctions:
    - no initiation
    - no levels (such as the circles of initiation in Eckankar)
    - every one on equal terms: he just helps remind you that [you are
    the Living Word](http://www.soundhealing.org/teachings1.htm)

One question I raised was about crossing the dark region. I said that
without a competent master, it is impossible to cross this region. He
agreed that you definitely want a master for fragile operations,
particularly the one we do: delocalizing awareness and moving it. He
spoke experientially about how he knew the region of apparent
emptiness to be a fullness which is in fact the Soul plane. And that
region is post-causal: all real Soul is energy.

At this point, I interjected that Scientology considers energy to be
something that the Spiritual Being (Thetan) can create and dis-create
via thought. I also said that we had a Catch-22. The Scientologists
would look at a bunch of people listening to sound as being fixated on
a subtle physical phenomenon that they could create. Whereas the Light
and Sound crowd would say that Scientology is clearly a causal plane
teaching (one where you learn to use thoughts to create your entire
reality) that has the 4th plane of emptiness as its highest
realization. How to break this Catch-22? Christopher says: "develop
discernment. Listen quietly to the Inner Sound." 

And regarding the Scientologists being at cause and creating via
postulates (creative thought), Tims says: "If all life is one, none of
us has ever created anything. And that is what Tibetan Dzogchen
says... 'all we do is change our description of ourselves and then the
description of the world appears to change - the world is nothing but
an appearance. If you see yourself X internally then the world appears
as X, etc.'" But you did not change or create a single thing. Only the
description changes.

At this point, I was wired. Here we have a person integrating diet,
exercise, new age, ancient civilizations and more into the a genuine
full-spectrum spirituality, not just "psychic junk food" as Tims would
say. I wanted to take his [Sound Energy
Dynamics](http://www.soundhealing.org/) trainings, but instead here
was his suggestion:

He's been teaching Inner Light and Sound for 23 years. Instead of
sitting and chanting, do the following for one week: for 15 seconds
simply listen for the inner sound. Do this 30-50 times per
day. Welcome the Song of God. This is will become the MahaTantra, the
great embrace, union with God. Within 1 week you will be to hear it
loudly all day. 

The positive result of this process is to knock off all sorts of
toxins and crust that has accumulated around the 3rd eye.

With all this power in Inner Light and Sound and practical workshops,
you think that would be enough. But it is not. His current focus is
[Mystery school teachings](http://bluestarmysteryschool.net/) - Inner
Light and Sound prior to the Vedas, back to Egypt and even Sumeria. He
offers a 14-month teaching (once per month) or get the DVDs. He loves
to go places and share once per month. He truly feels that he is
offering the The Next Wave of Light and Sound Teachings.
