
  My Dhamma Friend Program Experience

Terrence Brannon
<metaperl@gmail.com <mailto:metaperl@gmail.com>>
12/20/08
Table of Contents
1. Introduction <#_introduction>
2. I start the program <#_i_start_the_program>
3. Emotional drama <#_emotional_drama>
4. Knowing the knower (mental factors versus mental objects)
<#_knowing_the_knower_mental_factors_versus_mental_objects>
5. "Hey nothing is happening" <#_hey_nothing_is_happening>
6. My first raptururous realization <#_my_first_raptururous_realization>
7. From coarse to subtle <#_from_coarse_to_subtle>
8. Movement is the primary rupa. The hand on the belly helps
<#_movement_is_the_primary_rupa_the_hand_on_the_belly_helps>
9. mental noting <#_mental_noting>
10. What is delusion? <#_what_is_delusion>
11. Week 1 Summary <#_week_1_summary>
11.1. Week 1 continued <#_week_1_continued>
12. Predictive vipassana, why the mind wanders
<#_predictive_vipassana_why_the_mind_wanders>
12.1. predictive vipassana <#_predictive_vipassana>
12.2. The Mind Cares About Survival <#_the_mind_cares_about_survival>
12.3. Reply to my comments on prediction and survival
<#_reply_to_my_comments_on_prediction_and_survival>
13. Week 2 <#_week_2>
13.1. Summary <#_summary>
13.1.1. Willful Vipassana crumbles to the law of impermanence
<#_willful_vipassana_crumbles_to_the_law_of_impermanence>
13.1.2. Just sitting <#_just_sitting>
13.1.3. Rising - falling of abdomen <#_rising_falling_of_abdomen>
13.1.4. Meditation in daily life <#_meditation_in_daily_life>
13.1.5. interference or the power to be the Creator
<#_interference_or_the_power_to_be_the_creator>
13.2. Reply from Dhamma Friend <#_reply_from_dhamma_friend>
14. Neigbor interruptions <#_neigbor_interruptions>
14.1. Dhamma Friend reply <#_dhamma_friend_reply>
15. What is clinging? <#_what_is_clinging>
16. A breakthrough <#_a_breakthrough>
16.1. The reply <#_the_reply>
17. Taking a phone call <#_taking_a_phone_call>
18. Week 3 Summary <#_week_3_summary>
18.1. The reply from Dhamma Friend <#_the_reply_from_dhamma_friend>
18.2. A further reply from me <#_a_further_reply_from_me>
19. Bettie Page died at age 85 <#_bettie_page_died_at_age_85>
20. A Very Significant Progress Milepost
<#_a_very_significant_progress_milepost>
20.1. Instructor Reply <#_instructor_reply>
21. Issues with labelling <#_issues_with_labelling>
21.1. Reply from Instructor <#_reply_from_instructor>
22. I meet my downfall <#_i_meet_my_downfall>
22.1. How sad <#_how_sad>
23. Conclusion <#_conclusion>


    1. Introduction

Vipassana Dhura <http://www.vipassanadhura.com/> is an organization that
offers Insight Meditation instruction. They have an online program that
you can participate in remotely known as the "Dhamma Friend" program.

This document chronicles my participation in this program with the
intent of helping future participants in the program.


    2. I start the program

On 11/16/08 I started the program. Cynthia Thatcher sent me an
orientation email. Now the key thing in this email is this:

As you may know, insight meditation differs from concentration
(tranquility or samatha) practice. Instead of just calming the mind,
through the practice of mindfulness you develop the insight and wisdom
to see reality as it is. This results in a gradual purification of the
mind, which culminates in freedom from suffering.

Since Vipassana emphasizes mindfulness rather than concentration, the
experience and results are accordingly different than in concentration
practice. With concentration (samatha) practice one can develop very
peaceful or pleasant states in meditation. Although these occasionally
occur in vipassana, often you may feel bored during practice or may feel
that it isn’t working. (Actually, though, it will be). This is to be
expected. It does not mean you are practicing incorrectly. The insight
meditation method is just to observe whatever is happening right now, in
the body and mind, whether good or bad.

/Vipassana Dhura Dhamma Friend Program/
— Cynthia Thatcher

Now, the words above should not be taken lightly because they predict
precisely how I fell into a trap. Summarily put, one day I got curious
in Ramana Maharishi’s Self-Inquiry practice and decided to try it. One
thing they say in that practice is that happiness comes when thought
stops and they stop thought by paying attention to the root thought
which is "I am this body."

But let’s see what happened over this 4-week period as it certainly has
some interesting effects.


    3. Emotional drama

2 days after starting the program, I had a huge upset with a sexual
partner. It set my head on fire. I kept doing the practice, but it
seemed that my worries about this would never end.

At this point, it is worthwhile to note that you have to take some
precepts for these 12 weeks, one of which is not to engage in sex
outside of wedlock.

I decided (wihout prior permission of my Dhamma Instructor) to use
something I read in Nyanaponika Thera’s "The Power of Mindfulness" to
combat my jealousy. I would sit down and bring up the feelings of
jealousy, misunderstanding, and mis-treatment and then apply bare attention.

What I didn’t realize is that I should’ve been doing that Cynthia says
in the email below, even though it seems like it wasn’t working:

Terrence,

Good, I’m glad the section on emotions answers your question. Just
notice and label whatever emotions arise, without clinging to them,
using impartial awareness.

That’s very good that you practiced the hand motions exercise even
though your mind was disturbed (that’s the right approach; we are not
supposed to wait until the mind has calmed down to practice; that’s like
a sick person waiting to take medicine until he’s better). It’s also
very good that you were able to keep most of your attention on the exercise.

In daily life these thoughts and emotions will come up - that’s natural
when there are still mental effluents (impurities) in the mind. You can
apply the same technique to deal with them as during meditation. Just be
aware of the emotion, but don’t get involved in it. Disengage the mind
from it.

With Metta, Cynthia

/11/18/08 Dhamma Friend Program/
— Cynthia Thatcher


    4. Knowing the knower (mental factors versus mental objects)

I was reading Apprehend Reality
<http://www.vipassanadhura.com/apprehendreality.html> by Achan Sobin
Namto and had the following question:

Achan Sobin Sopako Bodhi states: """To practice insight meditation is be
mindful of the Four Foundations of Mindfulness: the body, feelings,
consciousness, and mental objects."""

However, a bit earlier, he states: """Nama (mind) is similar: one aspect
of mind is consciousness and the other is mental *factors*."""

So, my question is: is there a difference between mental factors and
mental objects? Or, can we say that there are 3 foundations of
mindfulness, body, feelings and mind. And that the mind aspect breaks
down into consciousness and mental objects/factors.

/11/17/08 Dhamma Friend Program/
— Terrence Brannon

The response was:

Terrence,

"Mental objects" includes a wider group than "mental factors." It’s a
bit confusing because, according to the satipatthana sutta, the last
foundation includes some rupa objects, i.e., the 6 sense-impressions:
color, sound, etc.

"Mental objects" is sometimes translated as "dhamma objects." I don’t
know that this is any clearer, however.

The important thing is not how we categorize the various objects, but
just that we understand what they are. It’s important to understand that
a consciousness object is different from a fourth-foundation object.
When you observe consciousness per se you’re just observing thinking or
you’re observing the knower. When observing mental objects you’re
noticing either greed, anger, etc.: mental factors in the mind.

Feeling is pretty clear. Rupa objects boil down to the six sense
impressions: color, sound, smell, tactile form and taste. But the main
rupa we observe is motion, which can be included under tactile
impressions. Posture also can be included here, because we experience it
tactilely.

With Metta, Cynthia

/Dhamma Friend Program/
— Cynthia Thatcher

I will definitely re-visit this topic later in this review, but what is
noteworthy is that you can know the knower. Right now, this is just a
theoretical understanding, but this technique really does allow you to
cut through tons of mental dross and know the knower, if you do it as
instructed with no additional effort or additional embellishments on
your point.

And certainly with no worries about outcome… just keep doing it!

And dont try to be "knowing" or "aware" or anything like that… most of
that is just coarse mental activity and has nothing to do with
fine-tuned geniune supramental mindfulness.


    5. "Hey nothing is happening"

While the purpose of this meditation is *not* to develop tranquility,
and you certainly will produce a ton of agitation during this practice,
occasionally a pocket of relaxation will show up. During the
rising-falling meditation, when this happens you may have a period after
the exhale where the inhale does not start immediately.

When this happened to me, I was unsure about what to do. Cynthia had the
answer for me:

Terrence,

If you mean there is a gap between the last falling movement and before
the next rising movement happens, then you can add "sitting" in between
falling and rising to fill in the moment, as it were. (please see website).

If you mean that you don’t perceive any objects whatsoever during that
time, and if it does not happen necessarily during the space btwn fall
and rise (i.e., rising-falling seems to go away completely for awhile),
it’s a bit of a different case. This happens from an imbalance of
concentration (again, I’m still not sure which condition is happening to
you). If there are no perceptible objects, observe the fact there are no
objects. Actually, in this case there is still mental activity going on
but it is very subtle. There is mental activity b/c you are aware that
you cannot find any objects. So that is what to observe until other
objects appear again.

With Metta, Cynthia

/11/18/08 Dhamma Friend Program/
— Cynthia Thatcher


    6. My first raptururous realization

Now don’t think this was a legitimate realization. All the rapture I had
then is not happening now. Neither is the turmoil and stress I
encountered from that girl I mentioned earlier. Neither phenomonon has
lasting presence.

But anyway, one day when I was doing the rising-falling technique I
noticed how the fall of the abdomen inexorably follows the rise. I then
began to mentally see thoughts as "mental inhalations" and realized that
they would "exhale" on their own.

This led to much deeper and longer breathing and I got fairly blissed
out. And of course I wrote to my Dhamma Friend confident that I had
obtained the Nectar of Enlightenment.

But the fact of the matter is that both the rise and fall of the belly
are rupa, or known objects of mindfulness, which means they will both
come and go. As an aside, the world mindfulness is somewhat weird
because in this practice all aspects of the mind can be rupa. Which to
me means something other than mind is observing mind.


    7. From coarse to subtle

Vipassana takes the simplest, most obvious physical actions as initial
objects of mindfulness. It would seem like an insult to tell someone to
do the hand motions. And for one single round of the hand motions, you
might do them just fine. But try for even 5 rounds and you will be off
arguing with your old girlfriend before you know it.

And that is when your golden opportunity kicks in. You simply label it.
And then of course the mind will scream that you just failed. You did
not fight back. But in fact you did, because you interrupted the habit
stream, lightly and gently!

Vipassana does not go right for the root of the problem immediately. In
truth, you are nothing but a collection of aggregates that you put
together under the fundamental delusion "I am this body." And all of
your worries stem from this lack of true self-knowledge. That being
said, mental apprehension of true self-knowledge is just good for
motivating practice, because your mind must be purified as well. Because
Vipassana is basically disintegrating boulders via erosion, the results
are not immediately obvious like some more active practices. And doing
body practices when the deeper foundations of mindfulness (such as
emotions) are giving you hell, can be tough and apparently
non-rewarding, but you have to give it time and see. And before you know
it, you may have a lasting stronger mindfulness to apply to the same
situation.

Cynthia explains that and much more:

Terrence,

Yes, I agree you should not add "sitting" if it is confusing. If adding
sitting is confusing, it means that it is not the case you perceive a
"gap" between the rising-falling, or else adding sitting would have
helped. So please just stick with the rising-falling technique, without
"sitting".

It is important to understand the reason and procedure for labeling
thoughts. If this practice is done correctly it will not give thoughts
more "life." On the contrary, it will do the opposite. Labeling is
simply a technique to help keep your mind in the present moment, on the
objects occurring in the present. If it is not used in the beginning, it
is very easy for the mind to wander around thinking all the time. This
practice actually cuts down on thinking if done correctly, because it
helps you to be aware as soon as the mind has wandered off, at which
point you can return it to the primary object. If you aren’t aware early
enough it will be very difficult to stop a train of thought before it
builds into bigger and bigger emotion.

The arising and vanishing of phenomena is not the same as the rise and
fall of the abdomen, although the latter also arises and passes away. We
have to be careful about confusing these 2 terms.

If you are going to deliberately focus on jealousy for 20 minutes so as
to see what it’s like, I recommend you do it outside of your normal
meditation session. This may be a helpful technique in some cases, but
in truth when you do this you are not staying in the present moment or
with a present-moment object at all. To do this is to use an object from
memory. It can be useful, but is not vipassana. Be careful, because when
calling up a certain emotion deliberately to watch it, there is a real
danger of making it bigger if you aren’t extremely careful and skilled.
This is a case when you may ingest it with more life if not careful, as
opposed to the labeling technique which, if done correctly, will not
make the thought or emotion bigger at all but will do the opposite.

The way to "starve out" unwholesome emotions is by not feeding them with
your thoughts and reactions, specifically reactions of liking and
disliking. The Buddha clearly said this. To keep replaying something
unwholesome is what he called "unwise attention." But if you patiently
keep noting it every time it comes back naturally, just note it without
any reaction, then keep returning to your principal object, it will
gradually fade out.

The problem here is that you are not simply noting the jealousy. Every
time it comes back you get upset about it. You are reacting by disliking
it. This is to lose double. First there is the jealousy, then on top of
it you are upset about the jealousy, which causes double the suffering.
The more you want it to go away, the longer it will stick around. If you
can let go of your desire to want to get rid of it, it will fade out
naturally. With true noting there will not be a reaction to the emotion,
but just a bare registering of it.

This is why we need stronger mindfulness, not simply concentration to
block out the emotion. When mindfulness is strong it will catch an
emotion at an extremely early point in its arising. When you can catch
it this early, it will immediately disperse. You will not then be able
to feel upset about the negative emotion because it will immediately
vanish the instant you see it. Mindfulness disperses things instantly.
This does not happen from intention, but from the power of mindfulness
and insight. Achan Sobin says, "first you take care of mindfulness; then
mindfulness will take care of you." But it takes a lot of training to
get mindfulness this strong. Hence the training methods such as the
labeling technique.

But sometimes talking to yourself wisely, reminding yourself about the
true nature of the emotion - its impermanence, etc., can help. Just
beware of confusing that with actual vipassana practice. The former is
called "skillful means." So you could try observing the jealousy for 20
minutes outside of normal practice; then during vipassana meditation I
recommend simply noting and letting go. This is what vipassana is all
about; impartial awareness. You don’t note the jealousy so as to make it
go away, but just notice whatever appears, good or bad.

It doesn’t matter whether you like the object or not. There is always a
temptation to find a more active technique in which we can use our
control or somehow force the objects to be better, to be the way we want
them to, instead of patiently observing whatever arises, good or bad.
Instead of just watching the jealousy whenever it comes up, you want to
make it go away because it’s bothering you. The problem is not one of
finding a better technique, but of seeing that you are disliking the
jealousy. The suffering is coming from your aversion, not from the
jealousy per se. If you remove your disliking for it, instead of
worrying about removing the jealousy, there won’t be any problem.
Mindfulness doesn’t care if the object is pleasant or unpleasant. It is
only the defilements in the mind (greed, hatred and delusion) who care
whether the object is pleasant or not. Mindfulness is happy to observe
jealousy just as any other object.

It is very hard not to dislike painful emotions, I know. It has to
happen from the strength of insight and mindfulness in order to be real,
not just from intention. Still, it greatly helps to recognize our own
dislike, which is a big step along the way of letting go of it.
Vipassana is about seeing what is ACTUALLY PRESENT rather than trying to
change the situation. So it will help if you can notice and label your
aversion to the jealousy. When you see it just note, "aversion," or
"disliking." If you can see it when it arises, your awareness of mental
activity will have gone up a notch.

It is important to stay with knowing body-objects more (but not
exclusively) in the beginning, because these will be more clear than
emotional states at first. That’s why it’s important to note rising-falling.

It does not necessarily mean you are practicing incorrectly if you feel
bliss; the problem comes if you like the feeling, which is to have
become attached to it, instead of just impartially noting it.

Mahasi Sayadaw wrote: "The practice of continuously noting the object as
it becomes evidentthat alone is the way of insight." This applies to
everything, good or bad.

Good luck with your practice.

With Metta, Cynthia

/11/20/08 Dhamma Friend Program/
— Cynthia Thatcher


    8. Movement is the primary rupa. The hand on the belly helps

I was reading one of the articles
<http://www.vipassanadhura.com/when-do-you-see.html> and Achan Namto
said that you could put your hand on your belly if you were having
problems following the movement. This did wonders. It deepened my
experience of what was happening. And thoughts were a completely
different experience. I could clearly discern and label rising and
falling versus thought.

Cynthia replied:

Yes. The "How to Meditate" article also mentions doing this. I’m glad
it’s helping. It’s good you can now separate the actual movements from
your thoughts. This is important. As I said in my other email, try to
stick with movement as an object more than thought. Movement should be
the primary object. But when you’re aware of your mind drifting into
thinking, label "thinking" and come back to the movement.

With Metta, Cynthia

/11/20/08 Dhamma Friend Program/
— Cynthia Thatcher


    9. mental noting

Terrence,

To clarify the noting procedure: you don’t have to mentally note every
single thing you experience during meditation (but you do have to "know"
all of it with bare attention; there’s a difference.) Only those
phenomena that make greed, hatred or delusion arise should be labeled
with a mental note. Most of your attention should stay on the
rising-falling movements, and you should label those. When other objects
occur that do not disturb your mind or take it away from that primary
object, it isn’t necessary to note them. For instance, if there’s a
quiet background sound but it doesn’t bother you, just ignore it and
keep your focus on rising-falling. Unobtrusive objects do not have to be
noted. If you jump around too much you won’t be able to develop
concentration with the primary object.

With Metta, Cynthia

/11/20/08 Dhamma Friend Program/
— Cynthia Thatcher


    10. What is delusion?

Again we see the coarse-to-subtle approach of vipassana. Before we saw
it with the foundations of mindfulness --- most of our initial work is
with the denser layers of being. Now, we see that we work with our
obvious greed and hatred instead of going right for the delusion -
taking anything to be the self when all things are non-self.

I suppose my hunger to destroy delusion led to me trying self-inquiry.
And for one day, it was really satisfying to me. And the same day (see
below) I quit the Dhamma Friend program. But the self-inquiry seemed to
backfire after that. And I have not experienced any bliss from
Self-inquiry since! Impermanence rides home to victory once more!

We have a lot of things that we have latched onto. Physically
dis-avowing them will not necessarily eliminate our penchant for them.

Terrence,

Whenever we take something to be self, delusion is involved, because the
Buddha taught that all things are nonself. You are right that suffering
arises from delusion, because we suffer when we cling to various things
as being self.

In Buddhism, in the broad sense, delusion means ignorance of the Four
Noble Truths. Practically during meditation it means you can’t see each
moment arising and passing away, which is the natural state of things;
you can’t see the impermanence, suffering (dukkha) and nonself nature of
rupa and nama.

But delusion is very difficult to see; it is the subtlest of the
defilements and the last one to be eliminated. The main thing is to
notice when greed or aversion arises during practice. When an object
"hooks" you by causing greed or aversion, that’s when you need to label
it, so that the desire or aversion does not increase. If the object is
innocuous and does not trigger any greed or aversion, just ignore it
(but you are still aware that it occurred) and continue noting the
principal object, the rising-falling motions. There are many objects
going on all the time during meditation but you should try to stick with
the principal object unless, as I said, something "hooks" you and causes
defilements to arise.

With Metta, Cynthia

/11/21/08 Dhamma Friend Program/
— Cynthia Thatcher


    11. Week 1 Summary

I include my Week 1 Summary and Cynthia’s response without comment.

When I do the hand and rising-falling exercises, I look at the target of
mindfulness. I find that my mind wanders too much when I close my eyes
and simply try to focus there.

This is a very uncomfortable practice. It is not a joyride. But it
appears to be working slowly from the outside in. Some systems work from
the inside-out. For example, Eckhart Tolle is a popular teacher of
/presence/, as is Sailor Bob Adamson. They teach only about what the
Vipassana Dhura website calls /The Country of Now/.

But I was never successful entirely with being given the absolute truth.
And from studying the Vipassana Dhura website (actually more from doing
this for the past week), it is clear why. Hearing about non-delusion is
not the same as getting rid of your own greed, hatred and delusion.

Here I am slowly being shown how fleeting sensation can be if I simply
keep paying attention. If I keep up Vipassana, I will be as free of the
body as Quang Duc
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Th%C3%ADch_Qu%E1%BA%A3ng_%C4%90%E1%BB%A9c>.

Now, I am running into a serious philosophical issue with Buddhism. A
successful Vipassana practitioner develops the power to not gain
rebirth. Now, to the New Age Community, to the /create the life you
desire/ community, and to many other spiritual communities, life on
earth is a Good Thing, we just need to learn to be more wholesome. They
think we are supposed to be here, but that we need to /raise our
consciousness/.

Personally, I want to get to the point of where this body is a chess
piece. Then it wont matter whether we are supposed to be here or not. If
we are supposed to be here, then I can operate the body in a wholesome
fashion, operating from the 4 brahma vihara. If we aren’t supposed to be
here, then I simply leave the chess piece behind and dont come back.

Many people are trying to lose themselves in their senses. For me, that
was never satisfying. But the struggle to climb out of the quicksand of
sensory indulgence is not easy. But it seems necessary unless I want to
remain a slave to former and potential mental imagery.

Being able to put your mind on something is basic test of sanity if
nothing else. If I can’t sit somewhere and observe a process without
getting lost in thought, I am clearly not in control of myself.

Dear Terrence,

Thanks for your update.

Just to clarify: please do not look at the abdomen when observing
rising-falling. This is not correct. The practice is to just watch the
motion with your mind. However, if it’s difficult to observe the
movements you can put your hand on your stomach as you have already
tried. If the mind still wanders, don’t worry about it. This is natural.
Just KNOW it is wandering. This practice takes patience. If you keep
doing it your mind will eventually be able to stay with the object
better and better. Thinking and wandering will calm down. But you can’t
force it. This has to happen naturally.

It’s ok to keep your eyes open if you want to, but don’t deliberately
look at the abdomen when you do that. Don’t pay attention to what is
being seen with the eyes at all. You need to focus your mind on the
movements.

If you look with your eyes it will confuse mindfulness because you’ll
have 2 objects in the present moment (a visual image and motion), and
mindfulness won’t know which one to focus on. Mindfulness needs a clear
object. It’s important to stick just with the motion object primarily
until mindfulness gains concentration with that object.

In vipassana we always observe only one object at a time (that is, one
object per moment.)

Can you please tell me: are you able to focus cleary on the movements
(when your mind doesn’t wander)?

It’s good that you are understanding how fleeting sensation can be if
you look at it in the present without elaborating or adding your own
concepts or judgments to it. That’s the way things truly are.

Yes, this practice is sometimes uncomfortable. However, it will get
easier. You don’t have to force yourself too much. You are correct that
when we can’t keep the mind where we want to, it reveals our own basic
lack of sanity. This is what the Buddha taught. This is due to the
effluents (greed, hatred and delusion) in the mind. The problem is that
we cannot get rid of these through mere intention. So it’s not correct
to force your mind too much. But the fact that you can SEE the present
craziness of the mind is already a very good sign. This is what should
occur in the beginning. In truth, everyone’s mind is crazy until they
eliminate delusion. Everyone is in the same boat. A beginning meditator
will usually feel dismayed when he actually sees how out of control his
mind is. This is a sign you are beginning to wake up. That’s very good.

But the approach is to eliminate delusion over the long haul. We have to
be skillful in many ways because delusion is tricky and has all kinds of
ways of fooling us. So you don’t need to use excessive force to keep
your mind in the present or keep it on the object. The important point
is to KNOW everything; to KNOW every time it wanders off. If it’s going
to wander, ok, let it wander; don’t get upset about it or struggle. But
you have to know that it is doing so. Just keep knowing what mind and
body are doing at all times.

This in itself is already much different from what normally occurs in
the minds of nonmeditators. If you try to force the mind to be better it
will react even more. Vipassana meditation is a very delicate procedure,
and we have to be careful to keep a balance. With practice you will
learn what is the right amount of effort and when you are trying to
force it too much. Remember to always let go. You have to know, but you
also have to let go. That means that you let go of caring whether the
mind is the way you want it to be or not and just know what is going on.
Even if the mind seems crazy, all you have to do is know that it’s so.
You don’t have to step in and change it. The change will happen
automatically if you keep up the knowing and make it habitual.

If you continue this practice you will eventually feel that the body is
a chess piece, exactly as you said. This will certainly happen. In other
words, you will no longer take the body to be your self at all. You
won’t need to get involved about it or feel bad when (for instance) it
gets old or sick and dies.

Keep up the good work.

With Metta, Cynthia

/11/23/08 Dhamma Friend Program/
— Cynthia Thatcher


      11.1. Week 1 continued

I had a few questions about her response, so I wrote back:

    *

      Ok, I will go back to one object of mindfulness

    *

      Ok, I will just keep noting. I will let the razorpoint attention
      required to delve into the Country of Now develop over time

    *

      Regarding open eyes, I suppose I will just keep them closed

    *

      I receive bodywork for my left arm. I also did some buddhist
      concentration meditation this weekend. These 2 things combined put
      me in this state of bliss. I almost quit doing vipassana, but sat
      down to do it anyway. The first time I tried, there was a
      tremendous amount of unrest, so I got up to quit. Then I realized:
      "the unrest is bobbing up and down like a cork in water!" --- it
      is possible to note the change is the bliss wave as well as the
      tremendous amount of unrest. So, I did my practice anyway. I cant
      say I left the vipassana practice in a joyful state, but I do
      understand that this is about perceiving impermanence, not
      swimming in bliss!

    *

      I ordered some books from your website, but have not received them

    *

      Are you a 501(c)(3) organization? What is your tax id number?

    *

      Yes, I can focus clearly on the movements

    *

      Are there no requirements for what to do during everyday life?
      While driving, walking, standing in elevator, etc?

    *

      Well, off for another session of noting change!

    *

      I do this vipassana practice exactly as prescribed in your online
      documents… I am vipassana-izing my concentration practice. I sit
      down and watch one cycle of inhale-exhale. Then direct my
      attention else where. Then another one cycle. I do not mix these
      practices. I do them one after the other or at different times of
      the day.

Terrence,

Thanks for your email. I will check with the person who sends out the
books and make sure yours have been shipped. I am sure we received your
order.

Yes, we are a California 501c3 corporation. Our tax ID number is: C1529490.

I just wanted to add about mental noting: you were correct before when
you said you don’t want to inject more "life" into certain objects by
noting them. I think maybe I did not explain the procedure very well. If
the secondary object is very innocuous, faint, and does not "hook" your
attention, it is not necessary to label it with a mental note. Just keep
noting the primary object and let the unobtrusive secondary ones be on
the "periphery." But if a secondary object hooks you - i.e., takes your
attention away from the primary object and causes liking or disliking -
then it’s very important to note it w/ the mental note.

You can experiment w/ keeping eyes open or closed. It sounds like you
have good concentration, so it might be ok to keep eyes open at times.

Your experience about noting the unrest is very good. That’s exactly
correct. I’m glad you didn’t give up on the vipassana. In this practice
we have to know whatever’s going on, even if we don’t like it. It is
good that you were not attached to the bliss. In a case like that, when
the mind is very agitated, you should use the mental notes: note the
unrest, and especially note the agitation (desire) in your mind that
wants to change the unrest. It is this agitation or resistance or
wanting to change something that is suffering. The problem is the
desire, not the unrest itself. That is the second Noble Truth: that
desire is the cause of suffering (and, more than that, is suffering
itself; is synonymous with it).

We cannot see that fact unless we also note unpleasant conditions of
mind. If we’re always blissed out it’s impossible to see how desire
causes agitation and suffering, which means we then are not motivated to
"disband" the desire and free ourselves. Achan Chah wrote that the peace
that comes from insight is very different from the peace/bliss of
concentration. He said the peace of insight transcends happiness and
unhappiness, so that no matter what kind of feeling (vedana) is
occurring- pleasant or unpleasant - the mind can still be peaceful and
free of agitation. This is a much superior but different kind of
happiness from what we normally call "happiness;" the latter is only a
matter of pleasant feeling. But vedana is never stable. It’s always
arising and passing away. That’s why, when our happiness depends on
pleasant feeling we’re really in for a lot of suffering. The goal of
vipassana is to transcend these changing conditions and be able to free
the mind, which results in "happiness" no matter what the conditions of
body or what thoughts and mental factors are going on in the mind.

Have a Happy Thanksgiving.

With Metta, Cynthia

/11/25/08 Dhamma Friend Program/
— Cynthia Thatcher


    12. Predictive vipassana, why the mind wanders

I began to wonder why I should wonder what is going to happen next, when
I know full well what is going to happen next. I also began to get some
ideas about why the mind wandered. I wrote on these two things to dhamma
friend. Cynthia’s reply had a direct warning about the trap that I fell
into. She makes it clear that the mind will say: "vipassana is not as
good as bliss" --- and nonetheless I fell prey to the trap 3 weeks later.


      12.1. predictive vipassana

There are two ways to do anything. One is to simply /stumble/ into it.
The other is to set your mind to the task beforehand. Until last night,
I was stumbling through these exercises. But last night I was preparing
my mind for each step just before it began. For example, let’s assume
that my belly has just risen. I then expect the fall and wait for it. I
dont just sit there and wait for it to happen. I am actively preparing
myself to observe falling in a second or two. Likewise, let’s say I have
just turned the hand 90 degrees. Next, I set my intention to observe it
rising. I dont just simply raise it and observe the raising. I set the
intention for that observation first.


      12.2. The Mind Cares About Survival

I just realized why my mind wanders when doing this practice. It takes
the mind about 2 or 3 seconds of watching me do this practice before it
decides that something else is more useful to its immediate survival. So
then it distracts my attention onto that something else in the name of
it’s own personal welfare. For instance, if I dont have enough
vegetables to make soup, the mind will bring that up because the soup is
more vital to its survival than sitting on the ground and observing motion.

So, what I do prior to each exercise is remember how you said that I can
be happy even if the body gets old, sick, or dies…. in other words, I
turn this exercise into a survival act of the highest importance because
currently, I do not want to get old, sick or die… I am AFRAID of all 3
and this practice is a chance to master them all. So hopefully over time
my mind will find an urgency about vipassana and cooperate with this
process of no apparent survival value.


      12.3. Reply to my comments on prediction and survival

Terrence, Vipassana is a very delicate balance. If we use too much
intention it will actually slow down mindfulness and we will not be
staying precisely in the present moment. Often it is important to give
up trying to control the situation and, as Achan Sobin says, "just do
it." It will not be perfect in the beginning, but it’s a matter of
gradually developing mindfulness, concentration and insight over time
until mindfulness is strong enough to cut through delusion by itself
without any interference from us. Achan Kor writes that there is knowing
that happens from intention and knowing that happens without any
intention, automatically. It is this latter kind of knowing that is the
valuable, genuine knowing of the higher levels of vipassana knowledge,
and it cannot be willed. As a meditator your job is not to make each
moment clear or this or that but simply to recognize whatever is going
on, even if the thing going on is confusion, fogginess, or whatever.

You should not be trying to do anything to what you are experiencing.
This is a difficult point to grasp because normally we are always
interfering and trying to direct everything.

The point where effort comes in is that you keep just doing it, despite
thoughts like, "this isn’t getting anywhere." In other words, you don’t
need to inject more effort or intention into each individual moment of
knowing; but over the long term you need to sustain the effort of simply
knowing what’s going on. This is much harder to do than forcing a whole
lot of effort in a few moments. If you do the latter you’ll be using too
much effort and will unbalance the whole delicate procedure. On the
other hand, if you just follow all your thoughts and moods, you’ll
easily give up the practice. The effort needs to be made in the area of
LETTING GO of various thoughts and desires instead of following them,
especially the ones that whisper to you that vipassana is not as good as
bliss, it’s pointless, it’s boring, and so forth. Just allow those
thoughts to be there but resist following them. Keep practicing anyway,
in a relaxed but persistent manner.

If you prepare yourself for the falling or rising movement, you are
absolutely not staying in the present moment anymore, because you are
anticipating. Even if your anticipation is only one second prior to the
event, it’s long enough that it’s taken you completely out of the
present. In vipassana we don’t want to anticipate anything, for any
length of time. Eventually you want to get so you are right with each
split second of the present, which cannot possibly happen if you’re
anticipating. You have to let go and trust the method and trust that
mindfulness will eventually be strong enough to handle whatever comes at
you, because in time it absolutely will.

It is a little different with a deliberate action like moving the hand
or walking. It’s true we say to observe "intending to walk" at the end
of the walking turn. But in this case you are knowing something actually
happening; that is, you are knowing the intention that is occur in the
mind right in that split-second. Moreover, that is only done once at the
end of each path, not before each step. The point of doing this is to
see the connection between the intention and the physical movement. This
is important for realizing the cause-effect relationship btwn. mind and
body (but that doesn’t apply with rising-falling, because it’s an
automatic movement.) In any case, to note the intention before every
single movement is too much and will bog you down. When mindfulness is
faster you will be able to see the intentions arise and disappear very
fast, but without labeling the action.

It is very good to remind yourself prior to each exercise about the
importance of vipassana; this is skillful means as long as you are not
doing it often during the actual exercise. Beforehand is a very good idea.

Also it’s very good you can see the reason the mind wanders off. That’s
very important. You could call it survival; in some cases that’s true,
but most of the time it’s just desire, because a lot of the things we
want have nothing to do with our actual survival. But the mind (rather,
desire in the mind) always paints a dire picture and convinces us that
we’ll absolutely die or somehow suffer if we don’t get this/that, no
matter how small the thing is. It is amazing to see how tricky and
stubborn it can be in this regard. Ironically, the reason we suffer is
not at all because we fail to follow the urging of desire; in fact,
desire is itself the very culprit. It is because we feel this pressure
or mental agitation or mental burning called desire that we suffer. It
is truly amazing that the thing causing our suffering somehow convinces
us that it has our best interests at heart, when the opposite is the
case. It tries to point the finger elsewhere while all the time being
the source of the problem.

When you meditate longer you will be able to see this clearly; it is
quite astonishing to realize. Right now you are using skillful means to
convince yourself of the urgency of the practice. That’s a smart thing
to do. But later, when insight is stronger, you won’t need to do this.
You will actually see, right in the present, the way that desire is
making you suffer. When this happens you will be amazed and feel as if
you had previously made a mistake about everything about where you
formerly thought happiness could be found. At that point you will
readjust yourself and set yourself to eliminate this desire no matter
what it takes. You won’t have to do anything to convince yourself then,
because it will be very clear.

When we really see what is causing our suffering, it’s the most natural
thing in the world to take steps to eliminate that cause. The Buddha
gave a wonderful example in the suttas. A fisherman thought he’d caught
an eel in his net, and pulled it out. When he looked at the creature
clearly, however, he saw it was a poisonous snake, not an eel. Instantly
he threw it back in the water. When you really see the trouble that
attachment and desire causes, you will want to just drop or disband
those things immediately, because you will see that to attach to this
and that truly causes a lot of suffering instead of offering happiness
as you thought before. Even if you cant let go of all attachments yet,
you will be much more circumspect and keep making an effort to let go
all the time, because you’ll see the danger there. Seeing this danger is
a good thing, not bad, because it is the way to freedom. Then
eventually, the suttas tell us, you’ll be able to let go of attachment
to the body-mind and reach the stage of regarding it as a chess piece,
as I know you want to do.

Well, keep up the good work.

With Metta, Cynthia

/Dhamma Friend Program 11/30/08/
— Cynthia Thatcher


    13. Week 2

Here is my week 2 summary and response.


      13.1. Summary

I started on the Week 3 exercises today. There are 5 topics listed
below, in order of importance. If you dont have any comments about issue
4, then that is fine.


        13.1.1. Willful Vipassana crumbles to the law of impermanence

It’s funny. I managed to do my practice for 1 day in that willful
fashion. I basically forgot the willfull approach and also forgot to
motivate my mind by telling it vipassana is a survival tool.
Impermanence wins again!


        13.1.2. Just sitting

I find the instructions for this exercise
http://www.vipassanadhura.com/howtomeditate.htm#d to be contradictory in
a few places.

First, the instructions for this say: """With your mind you are going to
look repeatedly at the body’s posture in the present moment.""" but then
later they say: """It’s not necessary to see the entire shape from head
to toe. Focus on one point, such as your hands in your lap."""

I’m pretty sure choosing a focal point supercedes the initial
instructions about body’s posture, but I did find it confusing.

In another place we are told /"""Observe "sitting" for one moment, let
it go, then bring the mind back to it. Watch this action - i.e., the
action of the mind as it turns to look at the sitting object, again and
again."""/ but if you look at sentence #1 versus sentence #2, they are
giving slightly different instructions. In sentence #1 there is no
"meta-observer", there is simply a person focusing on the hands, then
zoning out for a second and then going back. In sentence #2, there is a
meta-observer: not only is the focus-let go cycle occuring, but there is
a meta-observer of the focus let-go cycle.


        13.1.3. Rising - falling of abdomen

I want to return to a former comment of yours: """

The arising and vanishing of phenomena is not the same as the rise and
fall of the abdomen, although the latter also arises and passes away. We
have to be careful about confusing these 2 terms."""

Yes, I agree with this, having read a bit of the text /Moment to Moment
Mindfulness/. On p.107 to be exact. The rising of the abdomen rises and
falls. And the falling of the abdomen rises and falls. It is for this
reason, that I would prefer a different term for these two motions, such
as /expanding/ and /contracting/ or /opening/ and /closing/ or /filling/
and /emptying/. But those terms are second-order terms. In other words,
they involve thinking about perception (which is a form of thinking). We
want to stay as close to raw perception as possible. So, I dont see why
just calling both abdomen motions /moving/ is not OK.

But I really want to stay away from the terms /rising/ and /falling/ if
at all possible.


        13.1.4. Meditation in daily life

I have asked about doing insight in places such as the grocery line,
driving, etc twice before and you have never answered! I’m not sure if
you are missing the questions or just what. But personally, I am glad to
only have to do this on the cushion for now. And actually, I am starting
to disintegrate certain gestalts automatically. For instance, when I
hear a fan, normally it is just one roaring sound. Now, I can hear
certain rises and falls within that one sound. Or when water hits a bowl
of liquid, I can hear individual splashes instead of just one continuous
splash.


        13.1.5. interference or the power to be the Creator

I would like to start this section off with a quote from your last
writing to me: """

In vipassana we don’t want to anticipate anything, for any length of
time. """

I would like to note that there are a number of spiritual systems where
they mold reality to their liking by using creative visualization and
imagination. The underlying philosophy of these systems is: """the
creator wants us to live our lives with passion, integrity and purpose.
He enjoys the cosmic play and wants us to create.""" In essence, every
alteration of reality they are doing could be considered anticipation of
interference in what would have happened if they had done nothing.

From their viewpoint it would seem that vipassana is trying to turn me
into a door mat or lifeless sponge! Someone with no ability to control
or create reality, but only to accept it.

On the other hand, even my short regular practice of vipassana is
starting to make the creative arts look shallow. For instance let’s take
a hit song. I realized that what people are doing when they enjoy a
musical piece is hearing a bunch of notes and holding the notes in
memory and piling up attraction after attraction (contrast with aversion
or equanimity).

So the question(s) become: - are we supposed to be on this earth? It
seems that the goal of a vipassana practitioner is to never take
rebirth. I personally have to wonder if I would get bored of not having
a body… I mean, no soccer. No movies. No birthday parties. Just pure
awareness with nothing to do. I personally think that would feel
limiting and boring after awhile.

Now, I can anticipate your answer: - people who want things are slaves
of desire. Creating your reality, having a body are desires. Once you
see that desires cause you to suffer, you will not follow any of them,
including having a body. - people who want things actually are
identified with their body. The same people who gain pleasure from
getting certain things for their body will experience equal (or greater)
pain when they are given the opposite thing or cant have what they want.
They will whine like a little baby with the pacifier snatched from their
mouth. They are just bigger more powerful slaves of desire, able to
create pacifiers in the form of Lamborghinis, hot women, or large mansions.

But I’m really curious about the idea of having a body. Supposedly in
the 4 heavenly realms there are beings with bodies as well. I’m really
curious about what I am supposed to be, do and have.


      13.2. Reply from Dhamma Friend

Terrence,

   1.

      Its good you are able to see impermanence.

   2.

      If it’s confusing, I think it’s best you don’t practice the
      sitting exercise now. Just stick with rising-falling and the hand
      motions. Instead of following the website schedule, we can just go
      week by week and do a more individualized schedule. The sitting
      exercise can help beginners gain more concentration, but you
      already have pretty good concentration because you said you’ve
      gone into bliss states.

   3.

      Yes, I agree the rising-falling terms can be confusing. That’s
      find if you want to use your own term: "moving," or "knowing." You
      are right we do not want to think or conceptualize about the
      perception, but stick as close to the raw sense-datum as possible.
      Actually, when the book speaks of "rising and passing away" it
      should be "arising," as in, coming into being.

   4.

      Sorry I skipped this question earlier. We can’t usually have the
      same detailed mindfulness in daily life as in vipassana practice.
      In daily life we can use more general mindfulness and clear
      comprehension. The latter means understanding the reason and
      purpose for our actions and speech; thinking beforehand about
      whether or not each action is worthwhile to do or is wholesome or
      not. This understanding helps us keep the five precepts in daily
      life. On occasion you can still observe the abdominal motions,
      such as when waiting in line or other occasions when you aren’t
      occupied with a complex task.

   5.

      The Buddhist doctrine of conditioned dependent arising is
      essentially opposite to the popular new agey "create your reality"
      through visualization and positive thinking idea. However, it
      doesn’t mean you become a doormat or cannot affect your future.
      Achan Chah said that a meditator looks the same on the outside,
      but inside he’s very different. Outwardly he can still be as
      active as anyone, yet in the mind he does not attach to things and
      therefore doesn’t suffer. We can mold our futures by having
      wholesome thoughts, speech and actions which always result in
      happiness of one kind or another, whereas unwholesome acts
      inevitably result in suffering. The actions we perform in the
      present give a corresponding result in the future. So we are by no
      means helpless. You might want to check out accesstoinsight.org,
      look up "karma" or "kamma" and read some of the Buddha’s suttas on
      this topic. He explained the specific paths to becoming,
      respectively, beautiful, wealthy, intelligent, healthy and
      influential in future lifetimes. Also there are some articles on
      kamma on our website; I recommend you read them.

What you said about hearing music and piling up attraction from moment
to moment through the use of memory is quite a deep understanding.
That’s exactly right. And it does seem shallow when one sees it for what
it is. Yes, the ultimate goal of vipassana is to purify the mind of
greed, hatred and delusion in order to be free of suffering, which
entails not taking rebirth in samsara any longer. But this is a really
far-off goal. We have to focus on the shorter-term first. Even those
who’ve reached the first level of enlightenment continue to be reborn as
human beings for as many as 7 lifetimes. Once you reach that level and
have experienced Nibbana you will be able to know whether, in
comparison, the happiness that comes from having a body is better or
not. Right now you have nothing to compare to. So wait until you have a
superior object or different object, then you can decide. Even reaching
the first level of enlightenement is quite a lofty goal, but it is
possible to attain in this lifetime if we work diligently. But as long
as you still want to have a body, be assured you will continue to be
reborn with one. However, when you reach the higher vipassana insights
(even before realizing Nibbana) you might change your mind.

With Metta, Cynthia


    14. Neigbor interruptions

About 1/2 way through my abdomen observation practice, my neighbor
started with his music. At that point, I continued my observation. Once,
I caught myself lost in internal thought. And then I went back to
abdomen observation. However, a bit later, I got irritated by his music
then went back to observation. Overall, I would say that last 10 minutes
were not very productive.

I did not get a chance to redo the abdomen observation… or rather, I
failed to remain vigilant and return to the practice later that night.

I dont think 10 "missed" minutes of practice is going to make or break
me over a 3-month period. In fact, I learned a lot about time scheduling
from this incident and I did complete well over 75% of the practice for
that day


      14.1. Dhamma Friend reply

That’s fine, Terrence. Don’t worry about the ten minutes. As long as you
were aware - you knew - you were irritated, it wasn’t a waste. That
means you had mindfulness to see the irritation. In any case, you were
making right effort. It is good to see how anger or desire is directly
triggered by objects, following laws of cause and effect.

With Metta, Cynthia

/12/3/08 Dhamma Friend Program/
— Cynthia Thatcher


    15. What is clinging?

I had been wondering about meditation off the cushion. I told Cynthia
that I tend to not whether my mind is attaching or rejecting during
day-to-day life… the response:

Dear Terrence,

Yes, what you are doing is correct. It is true that both attachment and
aversion are forms of clinging.

With Metta, Cynthia

/12/5/08 Dhamma Friend Program/
— Cynthia Thatcher


    16. A breakthrough

The following happened on 12/5/08:

During the hand exercises, I was really flubbing. Many times I did not
pause. And my mind wandered. But I did keep noting all this.

Then I got to sitting meditation. And I was doing nothing more than
noting thoughts when they arose and noting the rise and fall of the belly.

Then this pocket sort of opened up. My mind was not working so hard to
do this exercise. I was actually waiting for things to happen so I could
note them instead of creating thoughts.

This was a very calming session. I know we are not supposed to fall into
tranquil abiding, but I dont think my calm was because I assumed a
mental state or emotion. I simply was doing my best to allow myself to
observe what was happening.

That was a satisfying session for me.


      16.1. The reply

Terrence,

Yes, that’s correct just to observe whatever is going on instead of
trying to control it or anticipate what is going to arise next. But
don’t expect your meditation will always be this way from now on. Next
time it may change again. That’s one manifestation of impermanence. Even
mindfulness is impermanent. So you don’t need to feel annoyance or
aversion in case your next meditation session is less satisfying. Just
know whatever’s going on.

With Metta, Cynthia

/Dhamma Friend Program/
— Cynthia Thatcher


    17. Taking a phone call

I had to take a phone call during meditation on 12/8/08. I learned that
it is best to start over if possible. If not, just continue from where
you left off. If possible you should try to let the calls go to your
answering machine or voicemail during practice. But thay not always be
possible.

Metta, Cynthia


    18. Week 3 Summary

I repeat my summary verbatim:

I find it unusual that the easiest exercise, requiring the least amount
of concentration or insight (observing "sitting" by looking at the hands
for 2 to 3 seconds at a time) is offered in the 3rd week. The hand
exercise and rising falling are much more demanding exercises from my
standpoint.

Anyway, I will take your advice and drop the observing "sitting" So
given that I am in week 4, what should the time breakdown be? I’m
guessing the 5 minutes for sitting gets moved to the hands, making 20
minutes for hands (10 each hand) and 20 minutes for rising-falling.

Also, it is amazing how relaxed I get from doing this even though I am
glum most of the time.

What I am starting to see is that the depression is an active act, being
re-created moment by moment by my tendencies:

   1.

      I think: "I dont have a job"

   2.

      I get depressed

   3.

      I think: "man, it’s cold here"

   4.

      I get depressed

   5.

      I think: "my friend has a job"

   6.

      I get jealous

And then the samsaric cycle repeats itself.

So basically I can throw some noticing of my footsteps in there or
something as I’m walking to break up the apparent rock solid wall of
gloom. It’s all good to say you arent the body as long as the body has a
job (grin). Actually simply noting the sense of gloom is useful. Because
later it will switch to a feeling of depression. Then hopelessness. Then
sometimes I laugh…

And presumably the law of kamma is at work. Some time long ago, perhaps
I made someone else suffer in the cold or lose a job. I couldnt tell you.


      18.1. The reply from Dhamma Friend

Dear Terrence,

Again, I feel it might be better for you not to practice /sitting/ as I
mentioned in a previous email. I would recommend that for now you stick
to the hand motions and rising-falling, because you already have strong
enough concentration. If you want to try out the sitting exercise
occasionally that’s all right, but for your regular practice I would
suggest sticking with the other two exercises.

It’s good you were able to see your mind clinging, then labeled the
thinking. That’s fine. You are doing exactly the right thing. It doesn’t
matter how many times you have to do this. Sometimes we have to do it
over and over for the whole session.

With Metta, Cynthia

P.S. I was sorry to hear you’d lost your job. I guess it’s very hard
times for almost everyone right now, given the precarious state of the
economy.


      18.2. A further reply from me

I accidentally did hand positions before observing sitting this morning,
but no biggie. Tomorrow, I start on Week 4, which means a longer time of
observing the hands.

The sitting meditation is a joy to go to after doing the other
exercises… it has so few moving parts, so you can really sink in.

Now today, unfortunately, my mind was trying to create the former states
of open-ness it had experienced. And each time I would be focused, it
would start clinging to that relaxation. So I had to basically label the
mind thinking about being aware many times.


    19. Bettie Page died at age 85

Sex symbol Bettie Page had a painful bought with disease in her old age
and now she is dead.

Here is what I said about her death on 12/12/08:

I tend to think of superstars as immortal and disease-free. But Bettie
Page had been suffering from pneumonia and then a heart attack and then
was placed on life support. Now she is deceased. Her final years were
spent in great pain. And also were a blow to her ego, no doubt. Her
early years were nothing but "living it up".

She made her body her temple and filled it with adoration and pleasure.
And then it broke down on her and left her in the cold, helpless and in
pain.

Pleasure and pain are two sides of the same coin --- I will never forget
being told that, but it’s only theory as long as you can have more
pleasure, like this tasty ice cream I’m having right now.

It’s such a shame that it’s so hard to decide to seek permanent bliss.
It’s so easy to want the adoration of millions. Millions of dollars.
Nice houses, etc.

But maybe it’s worth it. Maybe we are supposed to climb as high as we
can even if we plummet to the chasm below eventually? Maybe the risks of
reproduction (birth defect, death in labor, etc) are worth it to keep
populating the Earth? We keep improving as a species. We have better
cars. Nicer heating and air conditioning. The internet, etc. Evolution
and the urge to improve quality of living is obvious. Clearly, we are
all striving for comfort. Some do it by control of the senses. Others do
it by giving the senses what they demand!

Well, I’m just staying the middle way for now. For 3 months, sexual
impropriety is not allowed and I am not married.

/http://groups.google.com/group/odd-musings/browse_thread/thread/3c9a11e6e761e61e/f8b1e03ec067a06e?lnk=gst&q=dhamma+friend#f8b1e03ec067a06e/
— Terrence Brannon


    20. A Very Significant Progress Milepost

On 12/14/08, I had an unusual experience.

I had done 7 minutes of one hand. Then 8 minutes of the other hand. And
I was doing my 30 minutes of rising-falling. During the 30 minutes of
rising-falling, I was away floating in these thoughts. This happens
often and normally I just note them and return to the breath.

But what was odd this time is that I became aware of two apparently
independant processes. I heard some voice in my head going:
"rising-falling… rising-falling…" which was keeping track of the belly
movements. And then there was the brain just rattling off thought after
thought.

And then there was me there seeing both! And then I remembered how the
Dhamma Friend instructor said that mindfulness must be gently
cultivated. It cannot be forced, but can only happen over time.

So there is like this little me. But the little me will grow if I attach
to the thoughts. Or the little me will trance out if absorbed in belly
action.


      20.1. Instructor Reply

Terrence,

This is good. You said, "And then there was me there seeing both!" This
is the the knower or as Achan Sobin calls it, "the one who knows." It is
very good you were able to see the knowing as separate from the
abdominal movements, the labels for those movements, and your thoughts.
You are definitely on the right track here. This is what vipassana is
all about, as opposed to the feelings of bliss we can experience with
concentration techniques.

When you attach to your thoughts, this knower disappears; it cannot be
seen as separate, because it becomes the thoughts, so to speak. This
happens when we get hooked by our thoughts and desires. We become
completely involved in them and the separate knower is lost. This is
what most people do all day long, their whole lives; they get completely
involved in the object. At the same time, they cannot see that their
thoughts, feelings, etc., are not their "selves" because they cannot
separate them from the knowing. When you can see that a thought is
separate from the knowing, it gives you a new perspective.

When the knower can stay separate, it is possible to view all objects
with equanimity and not get involved in liking or disliking them. This
truly protects the mind from suffering, even when unpleasant things are
occurring. I’m glad you had this experience.

With Metta Cynthia

/Dhamma Friend Program 12/15/08/
— Cynthia Thatcher


    21. Issues with labelling

The label of the action is supposed to cover the entire duration of that
action. For instance, if you are turning the hand, the word turning
should last as long as the turn.

The problem I was having was that I would note /turning/ but only be 5
percent done with the actual motion!


      21.1. Reply from Instructor

Terrence,

Instead of labeling each action multiple times, try stretching out the
label so as to make it last as long as the movement by saying it more
slowly. Most of your attention should be on the actual movement, not the
word.

The purpose of labeling is to develop momentary concentration. Once you
have more concentration with the movement you’ll be able to drop the
label and your mind will not wander so much as you just observe the motion.

It is not bad that you have thoughts during the movement as long as you
know they’re there. Now you can see more clearly how many thoughts there
always are. They come very fast, in a split second. The wandering of the
mind takes place in very short increments as you are finding out. That
means you have more mindfulness now or you wouldn’t be able to see this.

You can keep experimenting with using the label and dropping it to see
what the difference is.

Cynthia

/Dhamma Friend Program/
— Cynthia Thatcher


    22. I meet my downfall

One day I spent all day reading a book on Self-Inquiry. It talked about
how happiness occurs when thought stops. It said that all thoughts from
an "I" thought.

I decided to try a bit of this meditation and was jazzed! I felt so
good! And I noticed how I was not thinking.

I still had not done my vipassana for that day. I became very loathe to
do so. I was thinking the very thoughts Cynthia warned me about: * "oh
this vipassana isnt really working" * "there is no way I am going to
spend a whole hour of my day doing this" * "vipassana is a big waste of
time."

I had also forgotten about Cynthia’s warnings about bliss systems. I
hastily turned in my resignation letter.

As always, Cynthia was very accomodating of my decision and responded
with equanimity:

Terrence,

Good luck. I’m sorry I couldn’t be of more help to you.

Metta, Cynthia

/12/18/08 Dhamma Friend Program/
— Cynthia Thatcher


      22.1. How sad

Can you believe that? All the time and effort she put into me for FREE
and *she* was sorry she couldn’t be of more help to *me*.

Of course I felt like an ingrateful pig for doing this.

The method will /most assuredly work/ as Cynthia said. You just have to
have the persistence. I had already made some useful breakthroughs. The
windows into /The Country of Now/ had been cracked open twice in just a
4-week period.

Just imagine how open it would be after 12 weeks.

You really have to have your sights set on *EXACTLY* what this program
has to offer to begin with.

If you are thinking about quitting, instead do your practice for that
day and *COMMUNICATE* with the instructor why you want to quit and
listen to that advice with an open mind.

Don’t rush and quit. And don’t rush and get involved.


    23. Conclusion

Be sure to get a copy of "Moment to moment mindfulness" because it has
pictures of a lot of the practice positions.

A Dhamma Friend 12-week program is highly recommended for anyone who
wants to get rid of the clinging mind once and for all.

I finished 1/3 of the 12-week dhamma friend program before falling prey
to a mental trap. Therefore, it is not recommended for the following
types of people (at least not by me)

    *

      people who want to use heightened awareness to "create the life
      they desire"

    *

      people who want a bliss joyride. If you read Achan Sobin Namto’s
      "Insight Meditation: Practical Steps to Ultimate Truth" there is a
      section which lists the stages of insight. It clearly enumerates
      an increasing ladder of painful sensations which will wrack your
      body as your mindfulness increases. If you aren’t fully confident
      in the power of mindfulness and not fully prepared to deal with a
      hailstorm of distracting thoughts and discomfort to make your way
      to the final goal, then find something else to do.

Metta! Terrence

Last updated 2008-12-21 22:32:38 EDT
