the biggest mistake of mankind till now has been the assumption, that
there was only one truth, equally valid for all. (10)

Education and intelligence are often presented as equivalents in
meaning, although there is only a vague similarity. (12)

the complete intention of this book: To convert the apparent
other-determination of individual beings, as well as mankind as a
whole, into self-determination which is to then culminate in
pan-determination. (17) .. [ other-det -> self-det -> pan-det ]

You don’t know how to create space and time? You are lying, as you
have so much fun playing the unknowing human. (21)

You can be everything what you see or perceive. An SB can create any
space, times, energy, matter, forms, objects and then decide to be
what he created to really experience something. (24)

True for you is what you consider to be true. And once you grant all
others around you that right, you will notice that you never give
offence and that you will generally get along in life better (26)

Reality is the degree or measure of agreement between two or more
persons or beings. Reality is not “truth” or something that “factually
and really is so”. (43)

A truth can exist for you alone. If others agree with it, you made it
to a reality. (46)

With your thinking you determine what you will experience in your
life. (51)

Do you realize how many people falsely assume they would know
something? Did it occur to you how incredibly brainwashed our society
already is, if so many people don’t even notice anymore that they
actually don’t know anything, (67)

And would you please do me a favour, to start right away to check any
information you get from external source before you integrate these
into your thinking, feeling and acting as “true”? (68)

Do you have an idea now of what I mean with brainwashing? In fact it
isn’t free of charge, in that you pay for it with the loss of your own
thinking, feeling and acting; with the loss of your individual
awareness because you became a small powerless particle in a thought
control system. Then you have become what is colloquially referred to
as “The Masses”! Lift yourself up out of the masses! Think your own
thoughts, know what you know and know what you don’t know and feel
your own emotions! (68)

The question one should always ask oneself is: “Is this statement or
information true according to my own personal observation and
perception? “ (68)

Charges always arise there where somebody wishes to avoid that which
he experiences right then. (85)

A spiritual being has gained the status of full self-determination on
the First Impulse, when the following abilities as well as states of
awareness apply without a shadow of a doubt or reservation and can
stand up to very exact and careful testing: 
  1. A SB (Spiritual Being) who - knowingly and willingly – is cause
  over mental space, mental time, energy and matter. (84) 

One could describe the subconscious as the accumulation of all those
things for which the person has not taken responsibility! 


The problem of the logical person is that he can no longer think
stupidly!  But he has lost something much more important than his
sense of humour: ... ability to be creative, ... to think up and
create something new. (92)

Pan-determination is the 
state of awareness in which a being has reached the certainty to 
possess the ability and willingness to start, change and stop two or 
more forces, whether they be opposing or not.  (152)

